Landing page update (#3656)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/programming_guide.rst

.. meta::
    :description: HIP programming guide introduction
    :keywords: HIP programming guide introduction, HIP programming guide

.. _hip-programming-guide:

********************************************************************************
HIP programming guide introduction
********************************************************************************

> This topic provides key concept of the HIP programming guide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic provides key HIP programming concepts and links to more detailed information. 
```

.. meta::
    :description: HIP programming guide introduction
    :keywords: HIP programming guide introduction, HIP programming guide

.. _hip-programming-guide:

********************************************************************************

> Programming guide introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HIP programming guide introduction
```

********************************************************************************

> The following gives a short overview over the chapters of the HIP programming
> guide, in order to guide you through the programming guide and explain how to
> make the best use of HIP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic provides key concept of the HIP programming guide. 
```

Write GPU Kernels for Parallel Execution
================================================================================

To make the most of the parallelism inherent to GPUs, a thorough understanding

> of the :ref:`programming model <programming_model>` is helpful. HIPs'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the :ref:`programming model <programming_model>` is helpful. The HIP
```

> programming model is designed to make it easy to map data-parallel algorithms to
> architecture of the GPUs. HIP employs the so-called SIMT-model (Single
> Instruction Multiple Threads) with a multi-layered thread hierarchy for
> efficient execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programming model is designed to make it easy to map data-parallel algorithms to
architecture of the GPUs. HIP employs the SIMT-model (Single
Instruction Multiple Threads) with a multi-layered thread hierarchy for
efficient execution.
```

> Understand the Target Architecture (CPU + GPU)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Understand the Target Architecture (CPU and GPU)
```

================================================================================

> The general :ref:`hardware implementation <hardware_implementation>` of GPUs
> supported by HIP is outlined in this chapter. In general, GPUs are made up of
> many so called Compute Units that excel at executing parallelizable,
> computationally intensive workloads without complex control-flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`hardware implementation <hardware_implementation>` topic outlines the GPUs supported by HIP. In general, GPUs are made up of Compute Units that excel at executing parallelizable,
computationally intensive workloads without complex control-flow.
```

Increase parallelism on multiple level
================================================================================

To maximize performance and keep all system components fully utilized, the
application should expose and efficiently manage as much parallelism as possible.
:ref:`Parallel execution <parallel execution>` can be achieved at the
application, device, and multiprocessor levels.

The application’s host and device operations can achieve parallel execution
through asynchronous calls, streams, or HIP graphs. On the device level,
multiple kernels can execute concurrently when resources are available, and at
the multiprocessor level, developers can overlap data transfers with
computations to further optimize performance.

Memory management
================================================================================

GPUs generally have their own destinct memory, also referred to as :ref:`device

> memory <device_memory>`, separate from the :ref:`host memory <device_memory>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory <device_memory>`, separate from the :ref:`host memory <host_memory>`.
```

> GPUs generally have their own destinct memory, also referred to as :ref:`device
> memory <device_memory>`, separate from the :ref:`host memory <device_memory>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GPUs generally have their own destinct memory, also called :ref:`device
memory <device_memory>`, separate from the :ref:`host memory <device_memory>`.
```

> This memory needs to be managed separately from the host memory. This includes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Device memory needs to be managed separately from the host memory. This includes
```

allocating the memory and transfering it between the host and the device. These
operations can be performance critical, so it is important to know how to use
them effectively.

> For more information, see :ref:`memory management <memory_management>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see :ref:`Memory management <memory_management>`.
```

Author: Fixed.

> allocating the memory and transfering it between the host and the device. These
> operations can be performance critical, so it is important to know how to use
> them effectively.
> 
> For more information, see :ref:`memory management <memory_management>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allocating the memory and transfering it between the host and the device. These
operations can be performance critical, so it's important to know how to use
them effectively. For more information, see :ref:`memory management <memory_management>`.
```

Synchronize CPU and GPU Workloads
================================================================================

Tasks on the host and devices run asynchronously, so proper synchronization is
needed when dependencies between those tasks exist. Asynchronous execution of
tasks is useful to fully utilize the available resources. Even when only a
single device is available, memory transfers and the execution of tasks can be

> overlapped with asynchrononus execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
overlapped with asynchronous execution. For more information, see XXX. 
```

Author: This topic is not written yet. We will link in the PR of the new section.

> Tasks on the host and devices run asynchronously, so proper synchronization is
> needed when dependencies between those tasks exist. Asynchronous execution of
> tasks is useful to fully utilize the available resources. Even when only a
> single device is available, memory transfers and the execution of tasks can be
> overlapped with asynchrononus execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tasks on the host and devices run asynchronously, so proper synchronization is
needed when dependencies between those tasks exist. The asynchronous execution of
tasks is useful for fully utilizing the available resources. Even when only a
single device is available, memory transfers and the execution of tasks can be
overlapped with asynchronous execution.
```

> Error Handling

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we point this section to the Initialization and Error Handling topic?

Author: I can add link, after the error handling PR or this PR is merged in.

================================================================================

All functions in the HIP runtime API return an error value of type
:cpp:enum:`hipError_t`, that can be used to verify, whether the function was

> successfully executed. It is therefore of utmost importance, to check these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
successfully executed. It is therefore important to check these
```

Author: @lpaoletti changed contains your suggestion.

> All functions in the HIP runtime API return an error value of type
> :cpp:enum:`hipError_t`, that can be used to verify, whether the function was
> successfully executed. It is therefore of utmost importance, to check these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All functions in the HIP runtime API return an error value of type
:cpp:enum:`hipError_t` that can be used to verify whether the function was
successfully executed. It's important to confirm these
```

returned values, in order to catch and handle those errors, if possible.

> An exception to this are kernel launches, which do not return any value. These
> errors can be caught with specific functions like :cpp:func:`hipGetLastError()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An exception is kernel launches, which don't return any value. These
errors can be caught with specific functions like :cpp:func:`hipGetLastError()`.
```

Multi-GPU and Load Balancing
================================================================================

Large-scale applications that need more compute power can use multiple GPUs in
the system. This requires distributing workloads across multiple GPUs to balance

> the load to prevent some GPUs from being overutilized while others are idle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the load to prevent some GPUs from being overutilized while others are idle. For more information, see XXX. 
```

Author: This topic is not written yet. We will link in the PR of the new section.

> Large-scale applications that need more compute power can use multiple GPUs in
> the system. This requires distributing workloads across multiple GPUs to balance
> the load to prevent some GPUs from being overutilized while others are idle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large-scale applications that need more compute power can use multiple GPUs in
the system. This requires distributing workloads across multiple GPUs to balance
the load to prevent GPUs from being overutilized while others are idle.
```

.. meta::
    :description: HIP programming guide

>     :keywords: CU, CUs, number of CUs, compute units

Reviewer 3: These are still not right.

Author: Fixed.

.. _hip-programming-guide:

********************************************************************************
Programming in HIP

> ********************************************************************************

Reviewer 3: This does not read like a introduction to the programming guide and its chapters, but rather like a summary.

Also: The order of the chapters introduced here should follow the order in the toc (which should be in the desired reading order)

Author: Updated.

When programming a heterogeneous application to run on a host CPU and offload
kernels to GPUs, the following are key steps and considerations to ensure

> efficient execution and performance:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following gives a short overview over the chapters of the HIP programming guide, in order to guide you through the programming guide and explain how to make the best use of HIP.
```

> Understand the Target Architecture (CPU + GPU)

Reviewer 3: Hardware Implementation

I'd also add the links in the headings, but that's up to discussion, I guess. The links can also stay in the text below.

Author: The heading links look ugly. We keep the links in the text.

================================================================================

CPUs are designed to excel at executing a sequence of operations and control
logic as fast as possible, while GPUs excel at parallel execution of large
workloads across many threads. You must target specific tasks to the appropriate
architecture to optimize your application performance. Target computationally
intensive, parallelizable parts at the GPU, while running control-heavy and

> sequential logic on the CPU. For more information, see :doc:`Hardware Implementation <hip:understand/hardware_implementation>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The general hardware implementation of GPUs supported by HIP is outlined in this chapter. In general, GPUs are made up of many so called Compute Units that excel at executing parallelizable, computationally intensive workloads without complex control-flow.
```

> Write GPU Kernels for Parallel Execution

Reviewer 3: Programming Model

As stated before: This should come before the hardware implementation (due to its current place in the toc, but also from a didactic point of view)

Author: Moved.

================================================================================

Efficient GPU kernels can greatly speed up computation by leveraging massive
parallelism. Write kernels that can take advantage of GPU SIMD (Single
Instruction, Multiple Data) architecture. Ensure that each thread operates on
independent memory locations to avoid memory contention. Avoid branching (e.g.,
if-else statements) inside kernels as much as possible, since it can lead to
divergence, which slows down parallel execution. For more information, see

> :doc:`Programming Model <hip:understand/programming_model>`.

Reviewer 3: This whole paragraph currently reads as if it was rather suited for the performance guidelines, not the general programming model.

```suggestion
To make the most of the parallelism inherent to GPUs, a thorough understanding of the programming model is helpful.
HIPs' programming model is designed to make it easy to map data-parallel algorithms to architecture of the GPUs.
HIP employs the so-called SIMT-model (Single Instruction Multiple Threads) with a multi-layered thread hierarchy for efficient execution.
```

Optimize the Thread and Block Sizes
================================================================================

Correctly configuring the threads in the kernel launch configuration (e.g.,
threads per block, blocks per grid) is crucial for maximizing GPU performance.
Choose an optimal number of threads per block and blocks per grid based on the
specific hardware capabilities (e.g., the number of streaming multiprocessors (SMs)
and cores on the GPU). Ensure that the number of threads per block is a multiple
of the warp size (typically 32 for most GPUs) for efficient execution. Test
different configurations, as the best combination can vary depending on the

> specific problem size and hardware.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph has no explicit chapter. It would at most fit together with the programming model, but even there it is way too detailed for this page.

Author: Removed. Updated

> Data Management and Transfer Between CPU and GPU

Reviewer 3: Memory management

Also: should we mimic the nested structure of the HIP runtime API-documentation here? Then we could add a section before this titled "HIP runtime API", and give a short introduction to that.

Author: We want to only highlight key concepts.

================================================================================

GPUs have their own memory (device memory), separate from CPU memory
(host memory). Transferring data between the host CPU and the device GPU is one
of the most expensive operations. Managing data movement is crucial to optimize
performance. Minimize data transfers between the CPU and GPU by keeping data on
the GPU for as long as possible. Use asynchronous data transfer functions where
available, like ``hipMemcpyAsync()``, to overlap data transfer with kernel

> execution. For more information, see :doc:`HIP Programming Manual <hip:how-to/hip_runtime_api/memory_management>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GPUs generally have their own destinct memory, also referred to as device memory, separate from the hosts memory. This memory needs to be managed separately from the hosts memory. This includes allocating the memory and transfering it between the host and the device. These operations can be performance critical, so it is important to know how to use them effectively.
```

Memory Management on the GPU

> ================================================================================

Reviewer 3: Device Memory
-------------------------------------------------- (To represent the nested structure of the toc, it also somewhat highlights a dependency, which chapter should be read first)

Author: We deleted this.

GPU memory accesses can be a performance bottleneck if not handled correctly.
Use the different GPU memory types effectively (e.g., global, shared, constant,
and local memory). Shared memory is faster than global memory but limited in
size. Shared memory is ideal for reusing data across threads in a block. Ensure
memory accesses are coalesced (i.e., threads in a warp access consecutive memory
locations), as uncoalesced memory access patterns can significantly degrade

> performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On-device GPU memory accesses from the threads in a kernel can be a performance bottleneck, depending on the workload. There are also some specifics concerning device memory accesses that have to be considered, compared to CPUs.
GPUs also have different memory spaces, with different access levels and performance characteristics, that have specific use cases.
```
I couldn't find a better word for "access level" right now. What I meant here is that shared memory is (generally) only available within a thread block.

Also: I just noticed, that the chapter on device memory doesn't mention shared memory at all, and I think we don't even yet have a chapter or section on shared memory anywhere, apart from a honourable mention in the programming model.

> Synchronize CPU and GPU Workloads

Reviewer 3: I know this chapter hasn't yet been written, but "Synchronization domains" maybe?
Especially as this chapter can relate to either memory synchronization and/or work synchronization

Author: We keep this.

================================================================================

> Host (CPU) and device (GPU) execute tasks run asynchronously, but proper
> synchronization is needed to ensure correct results. Use synchronization
> functions like  ``hipDeviceSynchronize()`` or ``hipStreamSynchronize()`` to
> ensure that kernels have completed execution before using their results. Take
> advantage of asynchronous execution to overlap data transfers, kernel execution,
> and CPU tasks where possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tasks on the host and devices run asynchronously, so proper synchronization is needed when dependencies between those tasks exist. Asynchronous execution of tasks is useful to fully utilize the available resources. Even when only a single device is available, memory transfers and the execution of tasks can be overlapped with asynchrononus execution.
```

Error Handling
================================================================================

> Check for errors after memory transfers and kernel launches, for example
> ``hipGetLastError()``. Catch and handle errors to allow the application to
> gracefully exit, with appropriate messaging. For more information, see
> `Error Handling <https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/latest/how-to/error_handling.html>`_.

Reviewer 3: The link should not point to a fixed url, but a reference (even if it's not merged yet, but currently it just gives a 404).

```suggestion
All functions in the HIP runtime API return an error value of type :cpp:enum:`hipError_t`, that can be used to verify, whether the function was successfully executed. It is therefore of utmost importance, to check these returned values, in order to catch and handle those errors, if possible.
An exception to this are kernel launches, which do not return any value. These errors can be caught with specific functions like ``hipGetLastError()``.
```
